Stepwise Migration of a Monolith to a
Microservices Architecture:
Performance and Migration Effort Evaluation
Diogo Faustino, Nuno Gonc¸alves, Manuel Portela, Ant´onio Rito Silva,
Abstract—The agility inherent to today’s business promotes the
definition of software architectures where the business entities
are decoupled into modules and/or services. However, there are
advantages in having a rich domain model, where domain entities
are tightly connected, because it fosters an initial quick development. On the other hand, the split of the business logic into
modules and/or services, its encapsulation through well-defined
interfaces and the introduction of inter-service communication
introduces a cost in terms of performance. In this paper we
analyze the stepwise migrating of a monolith, using a rich
domain object, into a microservice architecture, where a modular
monolith architecture is used as an intermediate step. The impact
on the migration effort and on performance is measured for both
steps. Current state of the art analyses the migration of monolith
systems to a microservices architecture, but we observed that
migration effort and performance issues are already significant
in the migration to a modular monolith. Therefore, a clear
distinction is established for each one of the steps, which may
inform software architects on the planning of the migration of
monolith systems. In particular, the trade-offs of doing all the
migration process or just migrating to a modular monolith.
Index Terms—Domain-driven design, Modular architecture,
Migration effort, Performance evaluation, Microservices.
I. INTRODUCTION
Domain-driven design [1] advocates the division of a large
domain model into several independent bounded contexts to
split a large development team into several small, and business
focused, teams and foster an agile software development.
These bounded contexts can be implemented as modules, each
one of them with a well-defined interface, to further decouple
the teams by reducing the number of required interactions
between them. This modularization is also suggested as an
intermediate step of the migration of a monolith to a microservices architecture [2].
The correct identification of what should be the responsibilities associated with each module is not trivial, and has
to be done through several refactoring steps [1], [3], [4].
These refactoring operations can be more easily performed
in a strongly connected domain model where the business
logic is scattered among the domain entities, a rich domain
model, and in the absence of interfaces between the domain
entities [5]. So, projects often start with a single domain
model, because in the first development phases the domain
D. Faustino, N. Gonc¸alves and A. Rito Silva are with DPSS - INESC-ID,
Instituto Superior T´ecnico, University of Lisbon, Lisbon, Portugal. E-mail:
{diogofaustino, nuno.m.bagulho.goncalves, rito.silva}@tecnico.ulisboa.pt
M. Portela is with CLP - Centre for Portuguese Literature, University of
Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal. E-mail: mportela@fl.uc.pt
model is not completely understood. Premature modularization
adds a cost to development, because of the need to refactor
modules’ interfaces, since the initial design does not capture
the correct abstractions.
The use of interfaces between modules requires the transformation of data between them to encapsulate their domain
models, anticorruption layers [1], which implies significant
changes do the domain model, and have impact on the performance of the system. Therefore, the process of modularizing
a monolith system, and further migrating it to a microservices
architecture [6], has to address these problems.
The migration into a microservice architecture encapsulates
the bounded contexts into independent processes that become
cohesive services, capable of being individually deployed
and isolated through an API that encapsulates and provides
the anti-corruption layers. Therefore, a first decomposition
of a monolith into modules can provide the groundwork
for implementing microservices, separating the aspects of
modularization from those of distribution. Only, the latter has
to address inter-process communication and decentralized data
management.
Research has been done on the comparison of the performance quality between a monolith system and its correspondent implementation using a microservices architecture,
but these results are sometimes contradictory, e.g. [7], [8],
address different characteristics of a microservices system,
e.g. [9], [10], or are evaluated using simple systems, e.g. [11].
Furthermore, in these studies, it was not necessary to redesign
the monolith functionalities in order to be migrated to the
microservices architecture.
In this paper, we describe the stepwise migration process of
a large monolith system into a microservices architecture, removing circular dependencies between modules, and adapting
each of these modules into independent microservices with
well defined REST APIs, while focusing on the migration
effort and the performance overheads. We also describe the
types of refactoring that were applied to the domain model
and measure their impact on the migration effort. Regarding
performance, we compare the performance of the three implementations: monolith, modular monolith and microservices.
Additionally, we describe the architectural tactics that were
applied to improve the performance of both the modular
monolith and the microservice architecture.
The results of this paper also provide a contribution to
the methods and techniques for migrating a monolith to a
arXiv:2201.07226v1 [cs.SE] 17 Jan 2022

microservices architecture, since the modular monolith can be
used has an intermediate step in the process of migration to
a microservices architecture. For instance, our results show
a significant impact on latency, even in the absence of the
remote invocations between modules. Additionally, it has the
advantage that by having an intermediate step, our analysis
can provide insights on the monolith architectural migration
to a microservices architecture that are independent of the
technological aspects associated with the implementation of
a microservices architecture.
In the next section we describe the stepwise migration
process of a monolith to a micorservices architecture, using a
modular monolith as an intermediate step. Then, in section III
the migration process is evaluated in terms of migration cost
and performance, and the results are discussed in section IV,
which highlights the migration trade-offs and the lessons
learned. Section V presents related work and section VI the
conclusions.
II. MIGRATION
The migration of a monolith with a rich and complex
domain into loosely decoupled subdomains is a stepwise
process that first migrates to a modular monolith and then
to a set of microservices.
A. Modular Monolith
The advantage of the modular monolith is that it conciliates small teams, one for each part of the domain model,
with transactional execution of the monolith functionalities,
because all parts of the domain model are stored in the same
database [5]. Therefore, it is necessary to describe how the
domain is partitioned into several disconnected parts and how
the modules interact.
1) Module Interfaces: To migrate the monolith to a set
of modules the domain model is split into several noninterrelated domain models. The interactions between these
smaller domain models are carried out through the module
interfaces. The modular monolith defines two types of interactions between modules, a uses interaction, where a module
uses another by invoking its interface, and a notification
interaction, where a module notifies of its changes the modules
that subscribe to the notifications. The uses interaction defines
a dependence in which the module that uses requires the used
module to be present [12]. In this type of interaction, the
module that is used has a provides interface that match a
requires interface defined in the client module. The notification
interaction allows a module to inform other modules about
the occurrence of a change without creating a dependence
between them [12]. This is achieved by sending events that
contain the information. The module that notifies has a publish
interface while the module that is notified has a subscribe
interface, and they only need to agree on the event structure.
In the uses interaction, between a requires and a provides
interface, data is transferred in the form of Data Transfer
Objects (DTO) [13], which contain information on the module
domain model in an inter-module shared format that preserves
the encapsulation of the used module domain entities. This
contributes to modules’ loose-coupling. The notification interactions define the events a module publishes and that are
subscribed by other modules. These events contain information
about what occurred in the module and which may be relevant
to subscribing modules. Usually, the events contain minimal
information and, if necessary, the subscribing modules may
afterwards start a uses interaction to obtain more information
about the state of the module that sent the notification. Note
that, the uses interaction establishes a flow of control from the
use modules to the used modules, and the notification interface
defines the inverse flow of control. However, the dependencies
only occur in the uses flow of control direction, because the
correct functioning of the module that notifies does not require
the correct implementation of the module that is notified [12].
2) Domain Model Refactoring: The modularization of a
monolith requires the decompositon of its domain models into
different modules, such that each one of the modules does not
inter-depend on a shared data repository [5].
To partition the monolith domain model, it is necessary to
consider the relationships between the domain entities that will
belong to different modules. These relationships need to be
replaced by invocations to the modules interface. Additionally,
since circular dependencies are not allowed in a modular
monolith, it is also necessary to decide what will be the relations between the modules, and implement their interactions
using uses and notification interfaces. The implementation of
these interactions requires the definition of DTOs and events.
Another aspect that needs to be addressed, when modularizing a monolith, is the presence of god classes [14], classes
that tend to centralize the intelligence of the system, in the
monolith. Therefore, it is necessary to split these classes into
several classes, one for each partition of the domain model.
This refactoring requires the identification of which methods
of the god class access which part of the domain model, and
moves them to the corresponding new singleton. This task
is trivial, except when the methods access more than a single
module, but, this case, is like the above problem of refactoring
inter-module relationships. Therefore, the complexity of refactoring of the god classes reduces to the complexity associated
with refactoring that removes inter-module relationships.
In a rich domain model two types of relations between entities are possible: associations, which allow for the specification
of various types of multiplicities, such as one-to-one and oneto-many, and inheritance. When a superclass has subclasses
that will belong to different modules, it is necessary to add
all methods that are implemented in the parent class to the
child classes. Similarly to the refactoring of god classes, the
complexity of refactoring inheritance hierarchies reduces to
the complexity of refactoring the inter-modules associations
they use.
The types of refactoring of a rich domain model reduce
to the case of removing an association between modules. To
do this refactoring, it is necessary to keep a unique identifier
of the domain entity of the used module in the module that
uses it. This unique identifier is used by the use module to

obtain a DTO with information of the entity, and for the used
module to notify a change of its state by publishing an event.
Note that, the returned DTO may contain unique identifiers of
other domain entities, due to the indirect relationships between
domain entities.
3) Performance Optimizations: The definition of several
modules in the modular monolith raises performance problems associated with the inter-module communication and the
need of data transformations to isolate each module’s domain
model. During domain model refactorization it is necessary
to evaluate the performance of the migrated functionalities.
If they show poor performance, the number of invocations
between modules have to the reduced. This is achieved by
redesigning the inter-module interactions into coarse-grained
invocations. Note that, monoliths are often implemented using
fine-grained object-oriented interactions.
The following performance optimizations are applied:
• Associate a database access index to the unique identifiers
of domain entities exported to other modules, due to the
frequent invocations to obtain a DTO object of the domain
entity, given its unique identifier;
• Whenever a DTO is generated, by default, it is loaded
with the values for all its attributes, which work as
a cache, to reduce further inter-module invocations to
obtain each one of its values. This introduces a memory
overhead, because some of the attribute values may not
be necessary in the context of that particular interaction.
However, overall, after systematically applying this tactic,
the performance of the system improved;
• In a few cases, after performance evaluation, it is necessary to have larger DTO objects, which, additionally
to the attribute values, also contain the information associated with several interrelated domain entities. For
instance, a DTO of a list of DTOs may reduce the number
of inter-module invocations when a module is interacting
with a collection of domain entities in another module.
B. Microservices
The modular monolith defines the units of modularity of the
microservices system. Therefore, the modules defined in the
modular monolith are converted into services with little effort,
which allows the developers to focus on more intricate aspects
of a microservice architecture like inter-service communication, decentralized data management and data consistency.
1) Microservices API: The microservice architecture defines different types of inter-service communication, synchronous communication, where a service requests the information through an API and awaits its response, and asynchronous communication, which can undergo between multiple variants, depending on the requirements of the architecture,
but mainly allows for services to share information without
any dependencies. The synchronous communication presents
a similar behaviour to the uses interaction where the services
maintain the dependencies and request information through the
network without redesigning the features of the service. This
communication performs a typical request/response interaction
using a technology built around HTTP like REST and replaces
the uses interaction in a transparent manner to the behaviour
of the application. The asynchronous communication allows
to adapt the notification interaction while maintaining the
behaviour of the service and avoiding circular dependencies
between the services. This is achieved through an event-based
communication where a publisher service is responsible for
publishing events to all subscribed services through a message
broker, responsible for managing the events and publishing
them. Additionally, this communication plays an important
role on the consistency of the information, resulting in eventual
consistency between the databases of the services in the
absence of distributed transactions.
2) Interfaces Refactoring: The focus of the migration of
the modular monolith into a microservice is on the interfaces
of the services. Both, the uses and notification interactions,
have to be adapted into the appropriate type of communication. This requires a redesign of the provides/requires
interface to implement synchronous communication, and the
publisher/subscriber service to introduce the message broker
and implement the asynchronous communication.
The refactoring of the uses interactions is straightforward.
The provides interface of the services are implemented as
public endpoints which are invoked by the requires interface
of a service through HTTP requests. The refactoring process
consisted of mapping the publicly available methods from the
interface to an unique URI and to an appropriate request type,
GET, POST, PUT, and DELETE, according to the actions of
the method in the information. On the other hand, the requires
interface needs to match the changes to the provides interface
and implement a remote access through the defined URL, with
the appropriate mapping in terms of parameters and type of
request.
An additional requirement related to the provides interface
in the microservice architecture is the compatibility of the
DTOs to the serialization required in a remote invocation.
Generally, this is a trivial process since the DTOs have a simple structure and mostly carry domain information, however
when carrying non-serializable information, this can require an
additional effort in order to adapt the DTOs without affecting
the behaviour of the application.
The refactoring of notification interactions introduces a message broker to achieve event-driven communication between
the microservices. In general, the introduction of a message
broker is not a complex task and mostly requires a publish
and listen method for, respectively, the publisher and subscriber interfaces that communicates with the broker. Another
aspect that needs to be addressed concerns the consistency
of the information in a decentralized data architecture with
asynchronous communication to notify services of relevant
changes. Therefore, the microservice architecture has to consider eventual consistency between the databases, without
which it can result in information inconsistency.
3) Performance Optimization: Similarly to the modular
monolith, the definition of several microservices and the
introduction of synchronous communication in the architecture

raises performance problems associated with the number of
remote invocations per functionality and the amount of information transferred in DTOs. The following optimizations are
applied:
• Implementation of caches in the microservices for faster
information retrieval speed and to reduce the number of
remote invocations for faster performance. Some of these
caches are created upon service creation and the data is
preserved until the services stop their execution, this is
very effective when the chosen data remains immutable
throughout the execution;
• When necessary, DTOs containing the information of
several interrelated domain entities have to be defined
to reduce the number of remote invocations, though it
increases the amount of information sent in a single
request.
III. EVALUATION
A large monolith was migrated to a microservices architecture to evaluate the development effort and the impact on
performance of the stepwise migration process.
The LdoD Archive monolith1 is a digital archive for digital
humanities having a rich domain model. It offers features like
searching, browsing and viewing the original text fragments,
different variations of the text fragments, as well as different
editions of a book. It also provides a way for users to create
their own (virtual) editions of the book, in which they can add,
remove and order the fragments as they wish. Other features
include a recommendation feature, that defines a proximity
measure between different fragments according to a set of
criteria, and a game feature, which implements a serious game
where users tag text fragments.
The monolithic application is implemented in Java using
the Spring-Boot framework2 and an Object-Relational Mapper (ORM) to manage the domain model’s persistence. The
domain model has 71 domain entities and 81 bidirectional
relations between domain entities, which resulted in a strongly
coupled rich domain model. This solution provides high
reusability, because the business logic is split among the
domain entities and can easily be reused, and also due to
the bidirectional relations that facilitate the navigation in the
domain model. In total, the monolith has 25.862 lines of Java
code, 20.039 lines of JSP code and 7.721 lines of JavaScript
code.
The modular monolith implements the same features as the
monolith. These features are implemented as a set of modules
that apply the uses and notification interactions to preserve the
dependencies between features: Text, which represents the
fragments and their expert editions; User, which provides
users registration, authentication, and access authorization;
Virtual, which allows the definitions of virtual editions
by end users and requires the Text and User modules;
Recommendation, which calculates similarity distances between the fragments, given a set of criteria, such as date and
1https://ldod.uc.pt/
2https://spring.io/
tf-idf (Term Frequency Inverse Document Frequency) [15],
between text fragments and uses the Virtual and Text
modules; and Game, which implements a tagging serious game
to classify the fragments in a virtual edition, and uses the
Virtual module.
A. Migration Effort
The migration effort depends on the number of relationships
between the new modules’ domain entities and on the number
of interfaces between modules.
In what concerns the domain entities, although a domain
entity may not have a direct relationship with a domain entity
of another module, it may receive it as a parameter of an
invocation. This is the dependency problem addressed by the
Demeter Law [16]. So, these indirect relationships also need
to be dealt with during the refactoring process.
Figure 1 shows a refactoring that illustrates most of the
found situations. The refactoring was applied to part of
the monolith domain model, where abstract superclasses
Edition and FragInter are removed and their subclasses
split between Text and Virtual modules. The association between FragInter and Fragment is preserved in
the Text module in entity ScholarInter, but in the
Virtual module the fragment will be represented by its
unique identification to be stored inVirtualEditionInter . When
necessary, the Virtual module can request the information
of a fragment, given its unique identifier, and receive the
corresponding FragmentDto object. Additionally, when a
Fragment is deleted, the Text module emits an event that
is subscribed by the Virtual module in order to delete the
corresponding VirtualEditionInter entities. A similar
refactoring is applied to the association between FragInter
and VirtualEditionInter which results in a reflexive
association in entity VirtualEditionInter together of a
unique identifier of a ScholarInter entity.
Table I presents the impact of the domain model refactorings
in terms of domain entities, and their relationships, of the
different modules. It can be observed that there is a big
impact on the domain models, where more than 50% of the
domain entities had to be changed, and in the case of the
Virtual module this value reaches 82%. This corresponds
to a considerable effort associated with the migration from the
monolith to the modular monolith. A similar situation can be
observed in the percentage of DTOs that had to be defined,
given the total number of domain entities, which has impact
on the changes to the modules that use these DTOs, and in
particular in the domain entities that interacted, before the
refactorization, with the original domain entities.
Note that, while the number of domain entities modified
in the Text module might appear higher than it should be,
since it does not depend on any other module, the majority of
the changes were relatively small and focused mainly on the
module’s publish interface. It is necessary to remove code that
interacts with entities that are located in other modules, and
emit events instead. For instance, the remove method of the
FragInter entity, that is moved to the ScholarInter

Fig. 1: Domain model refactoring (partial)
Text User Virtual Recomendation Game
Modified Entities/Total Entities 23/42 (55%) 2/5 (40%) 14/17 (82%) 1/2 (50%) 3/5 (60%)
Defined DTOs/Total Entities 10/42 (24%) 1/5 (20%) 7/17 (41%) 0/2 (0%) 0/5 (0%)
Modified Relations/Total Relations 6/38 (15%) 4/7 (57%) 7/26 (27%) 0/2 (0%) 0/6 (0%)
Removed Relations/Total Relations 2/38 (5%) 0/7 (0%) 3/26 (12%) 2/2 (100%) 5/6 (83%)
TABLE I: Impact of the refactoring in the domain model
subclass. Originally, this entity had a direct relationship to
a set of VirtualEditionInter instances, allowing it to
directly trigger the removal of those instances when it is
removed. Since this relation was removed due to connecting
two separate modules, this code was replaced with a call to
the event interface to notify all modules of the removal of an
instance of ScholarInter (FragInter).
In what concerns the impact on associations, two situations can occur: (1) modified relations, which correspond
to associations where one of the involved domain entities
changes, but not the overall meaning and purpose of the
association; (2) removed associations, which correspond to
associations between domain entities of different modules
that have become represented by the domain entities unique
identifiers. Considering the refactorings in Figure 1, where the
association between FragInter and Fragment is initially
refactored into an association between ScholarInter and
Fragment and another between VirtualEditionInter
and Fragment, the former new association is modified, and
the latter is removed.
It can be observed in Table I that there is a smaller impact of
the refactoring on the associations, because only the associations between domain entities belonging to different modules
are impacted, while more domain entities can be impacted
due to the indirect relationships. However, the percentage of
changed associations is higher if a module has less domain
entities, because most of them will be in the interface with
the other modules. Therefore, in the Text module a high
number of relations are fully contained within the module,
and it leads to a low percentage of modified relations when
compared to other modules that required modifications. On
the other hand, the Recommendation module is the outlier
among the modules. The fact that all its relations are removed
is the result of having only two domain entities, which had
associations with domain entities belonging to other modules.
The refactorings to a microservice architecture are focused
on two different major aspects of the modular architecture, the
provides and requires interface and the corresponding DTOs
from each service. Table II presents the impact of refactoring
the uses interaction into synchronous communication using a
REST API. It can be observed a significantly high percentages
of modified methods where at least 83% of the methods had
to be mapped. This may look like a significant migration
effort, but these changes were simple changes to implement,
consisting of repetitive mapping procedures.
However, a few incompatibilities were detected that directly
affected the refactoring cost which should be taken into
consideration while developing the interfaces in the modular
monolith for a smoother migration. For instance, an incompatibility was found in methods of the provides interface that
required multiple complex objects as different parameters,
which was not supported by the HTTP protocol due to the
body of a HTTP request only being parsed once. In these
cases, the definition of additional serializable DTOs that wrap
the parameters were required in these methods. Therefore, this
is a simple solution with a low effort to implement. That is
why there are more DTOs than in the modular monolith.
Another incompatibility was the presence of nonserializable information being transferred between the modules that could not be transferred in a remote invocation
of a service. This behaviour proved to have a more serious
consequence, that not only affected the API but also the
features from a service. An example of this incompatibility
was found in the Recommendation microservice where the
methods utilized a non-serializable data structure to transfer
the information in the DTOs. A way to address this situation

Text User Virtual Recommendation Game
Pro Pro Pro Req Pro Req Pro Req
Modified/Total Methods 91/109 (83%) 43/47 (91%) 152/155 (98%) 6/6 (100%) 6/6 (100%) 7/7 (100%) 14/14 (100%) 9/9 (100%)
New Methods 16 2 2 18 1 0 0 2
Modified/Total DTOs 6/15 (40%) 2/3 (67%) 9/14 (64%) 3/11 (27%) 2/6 (33%)
TABLE II: Impact of the refactoring in the provides interfaces (P) and requires interfaces (R) and DTOs from each of the
microservices in terms of refactored methods and DTOs. Text and User modules do not have required interfaces because they
do not use other modules.
is by implementing a custom serializable configuration for
that type of information, which would allow the serialization
into a JSON format that could be sent between the services
and be applicable to every usage throughout the interfaces.
This is an efficient solution that allows the reuse of the
information in the DTOs and maintains the refactoring in
the scope of the API, but the effort depends on the object.
On the other hand, if the serialization cannot be achieved,
it is necessary to individually address their usages and adapt
how the information is transferred between the services while
maintaining the behaviour of the functionality that depends
on it. Therefore, the quality of the interfaces in the modular
monolith have an effect on the migration effort and it is
important to keep the information transferred between the
modules simple for an efficient migration.
B. Performance
To evaluate the impact that the new architecture has on the
performance of the system, we performed performance tests
on the previously described features of the application, using
JMeter3. The testing was done with the application running
inside Docker containers on a dedicated machine with an Intel
I7 6 cores, 16GB of RAM and a 1TB of SSD.
Four functionalities were selected for the analysis. They
were chosen due to their impact in terms of: the number
of the domain entities they interact with, the number of
modules/services accessed by the functionality, and the amount
of processing required by the functionality.
The Source Listing functionality presents the listing of the
archive sources, where a source corresponds to a physical
source document. When using this functionality, the end
user obtains all the information about each one of the 754
sources, such as date, dimensions, and type of ink used in
the document. The implementation of this functionality is
done through an interaction between the front-end and Text
modules/services. The modular monolith implementation was
optimized to have a single invocation between the modules and
a composed DTO object is returned, which contains the list of
all FragmentDTOs where each FragmentDTO embeds its
list of SourceDTOs.
The Fragment Listing functionality is implemented in the
modular monolith and microservice as an interaction between
the front-end and Text to present the list of all fragments.
There are 720 text fragments in the archive. For each fragment
the information of several interpretations are presented, and
3https://jmeter.apache.org/
each fragment can have 2 to 7 interpretations. The frontend does a total of 5 invocations to the Text module. Only
one of the invocations required an additional optimization,
in which the front-end obtains the list of FragmentDTOs,
and each fragment contains its ScholarInterDTOs, both
ExpertEditionDTOs and SourceInterDTOs.
The Interpretation View functionality presents an interpretation of a text fragment. Its implementation in the modular monolith and microservice requires several interactions
between the front-end and the Text, User and Virtual modules/services. To do the performance test it was chosen an
interpretation of a virtual edition that includes several different
domain entity types. It was not possible to optimize the
implementation of the functionality using a coarse-grained
invocation. On the other hand, the amount of information
retrieved in each inter-module interaction is small.
The Assisted Ordering functionality orders the fragments
according to a set of criteria, such as date and text similarity
(tf-idf). This ordering requires more than 250 000 fragment
comparisons (considering for instance a virtual edition with
720 fragments, we get 720 ∗ 719/2 = 258 840 comparisons
between fragments), and each comparison requires information
about the fragment for up to 4 criteria. For its implementation
the front-end accesses 4 back-end modules/services: Text,
User, Virtual and Recommendation. Because this functionality repeatedly interacts through the same set of data, the
information about the fragments is cached in the monolith implementation, to improve performance. The modular monolith
implementation also uses this cache while the microservice
architecture implemented two additional caches due to performance deterioration caused by remote invocations of the same
set of data.
Table III presents the number of domain entity types, for
each module, that a functionality accesses.
For each functionality, a test case was designed to compare
the performance for all three architectures. Each test case run
simulates a user that sequentially submits 50 requests, after a
first request to warm up the caches. The test cases are run for
two different loads of the database, for 100 and 720 fragments,
respectively. The results are shown in Table IV.
In what concerns the comparison of the performance between the monolith and the modular monolith, it can be
observed that the impact on performance of the migration to
the modular monolith increases with the number of fragments.
In 3 of the 4 functionalities the difference on the performance,
between the monolith and the modular monolith, is much
higher for 720 fragments than for 100 fragments. This is

Text User Virtual Recommendation Game
Source Listing 8/42 (19%) 0/5 (0%) 0/17 (0%) 0/2 (0%) 0/5 (0%)
Fragment Listing 9/42 (21%) 0/5 (0%) 0/17 (0%) 0/2 (0%) 0/5 (0%)
Interpretation View 22/42 (52%) 1/5 (20%) 6/17 (35%) 0/2 (0%) 0/5 (0%)
Assisted Ordering 21/42 (50%) 1/5 (20%) 3/17 (18%) 1/2 (50%) 0/5 (0%)
TABLE III: Coverage of the domain entities by each of the functionalities
Monolith Modular Microservices
Variation
Monolith
Modular
Variation
Modular
Microservices
Variation
Monolith
Microservices
Source
Listing
Latency 17/61 22/629 438/4317 29%/931% 1891%/586% 2476%/6977%
Throughput 55.1/16.2 43.7/1.6 2.3/0.23 -21%/-90% -95%/-86% -96%/-99%
Fragment
Listing
Latency 103/350 61/1095 725/5715 -41%/213% 1089%/422% 604%/1533%
Throughput 9.6/2.9 16.1/0.91 1.4/0.18 68%/-69% -91%/-80% -85%/-94%
Interpretation
View
Latency 29/25 24/37 155/140 -17%/48% 546%/278% 434%/460%
Throughput 33.3/38.3 40.9/26.4 6.4/7.1 23%/-31% -84%/-73% -81%/-81%
Assisted
Ordering
Latency 137/3801 165/12295 886/11444 20%/223% 437%/-7% 547%/201%
Throughput 2.3/0.24 2.2/0.08 0.85/0.085 -4%/-67% -61%/6% -63%/-65%
TABLE IV: Performance results for sequentially executing 50 times each functionality for 100 and 720 fragments in the database
while running inside Docker containers. Results are separated by / in each cell, for instance, by sequentially executing 50 times
the Source Listing functionality in the monolith we observed an average latency of respectively 17, and 61, milliseconds, where
there are respectively 100, and 720, fragments in the database (17/61).
due to the number of DTOs that are generated. Note that for
the Interpretation View functionality, there is no difference,
because it is a functionality that does not depend on the
number of fragments in the database. In the Assisted Ordering
functionality the difference is not so significant as it would be
expected, considering the number of operations. This is due
to a cache that is being used in both implementations, which
reduces the need to transfer DTOs between modules, although
this is the most computationally demanding functionality.
Additionally, and a little bit surprising, for 100 fragments
some functionalities have slightly better performance in the
modular monolith. This is due to the fact that one of the
modular monolith optimizations is the association of an index
to the unique identifiers that are sent to the other modules.
The monolith is implemented following an object-oriented
approach, where objects are retrieved by searching in an
object graph. The optimization in the modular monolith allows
a faster retrieval of the domain entities, given their unique
identifier, because there are less round trips to the database.
This was verified through some test cases, in which this optimization is removed, and the results showed a huge decrease
of the performance of the modular monolith. Note that, since
the Interpretation View functionality does not depend on the
number of fragments, it performed better than the monolith
even for the tests with 720 fragments.
In what concerns the comparison of the performance between the modular monolith and the microservices architecture, it can be observed that the microservice architecture has
a severe negative impact on the performance, both in terms of
latency and throughput, independently of the functionality and
information in the database. The Fragment Listing functionality experienced an extreme negative user experience, reaching
a latency average of 5715 ms with a variation of 422% for
720 fragments in the database, while also experiencing latency
variation values of 1089% for 100 fragments in the database.
Similar latency variation values were also observed in the
Source Listing functionality. These performance values are a
consequence of the number of remote invocations necessary
to implement the functionality. In each request/response of
a remote invocation, the latency values increases due to the
network overheads, such as the serialization/deserialization
times, that severely affect the performance as the information
increases, showing a severe drawback of remote invocations.
The Interpretation View functionality also underwent the
effects of the performance drawbacks due to its inter-service
communication, presenting a negative impact on the performance. However, the variation was significantly lower than
the previously described functionalities and was still capable
of providing a good experience to the end-user. This is due
to not only a significant difference in the number of remote
invocations, but also to the fact that the amount of information
sent in the invocation being relatively small, which reduces the
network overheads.
Surprisingly, the microservice architecture did not impact
the performance of the Assisted Ordering functionality. This
is mainly due to two reasons. First, the functionality is computationally demanding, which reduces the impact of distributed
communication on the overall performance. Second, the use of
caches proved to be effective in optimizing the performance
of the functionality. In the modular monolith, a cache that
stored the computational results used in each request was
already implemented, but, additionally, two more caches were

implemented during the development of the Recommendation
service that stores domain information related to the fragments.
Because the functionality repeatedly interacts through the
same set of data, these caches reduced the number of remote
invocations necessary to perform the functionality.
During the migration of the modular monolith to the
microservices architecture a performance degradation was
initially identified due to the high number of fine-grained
invocations between the microservices. Therefore, in order to
have coarse-grained interactions, it was necessary to increase
the amount of domain information preemptively sent in certain
DTOs, which were frequently utilized together. This replaced
remote invocations for local invocations, thus reducing the
network overheads and improving the performance. By adding
additional information to the DTOs, we were able to cache
the information and support the composition of several DTOs
in a single object. With this simple change, the information
is now accessible through a single invocation, where before
would require several inter-service invocations. However, it
is necessary to consider some trade-offs when choosing the
information to send, to avoid sending information that is
not necessary which will introduce additional overheads. It
is necessary to analyse whether the data is frequently used
together by the functionalities.
Overall, when comparing the performance of the monolith
with the microservices system, and although all the optimizations, the differences are significant for all functionalities,
varying the latency between 201% and 6977%. This is the
consequence of the introduction of additional network overheads that are caused by remote invocations. Note that, a
major performance bottleneck of the remote invocations came
from the need to serialize and deserialize the DTOs on each
invocation, due to how it introduces additional latency that
becomes more noticeable as the information increases. For
instance, we measured and observed that even in a coarsegrained communication, the serialization/deserialization time
of the Source Listing functionality corresponded to 82% of
the average latency of the functionality, reaching a serialization
time over 3000 ms and a deserialization time of 560 ms. This is
a considerable impact on the performance of the functionality,
which further increases the latency of the functionality in the
modular monolith.
C. Data consistency
The decentralization of the application data introduces challenges to the architecture concerning its data consistency, due
to the transactional behaviour between the different databases.
Transactions that span across multiple services cannot implement ACID properties between them.
In the microservices implementation most functionalities are
read functionalities, which access one or more microservices
to present results to the end user. These functionalities do
not create intermediate states, in case of failure, which would
generate inconsistent states, due to the lack of isolation. On the
other other, functionalities that change data are implemented
such that the write occurs in the last local transaction to be
executed, and so, they do not introduce inconsistent states.
However, when the implementation of a functionality implies the asynchronous communication between microservices
it introduces eventual consistency between their states. The
state of the microservice that receives the event is outdated,
compared to the state of the service that publishes it. Their
states will be eventually consistent, but, meanwhile, it is possible for a functionality, which accesses both microservices,
to observe inconsistent states. This may result, for instance,
in the failure of the functionality, if the second microservice
gives the functionality an identifier of a domain entity that
does not exist in the first microservice.
Most of the events are related with the remove of a
domain entity. For instance, upon the removal of a Fragment
from the Text microservice, the Virtual microservice needs to
receive the appropriate event to delete any reference to this
fragment from the database. This means that it is important
to understand the different type of events sent between the
microservices, how they affect the data consistency of the
different services and how eventual states affect the different
functionalities.
Table V presents an overview of the different type of
events of the LdoD application with the respective publisher/subscriber microservices and impact on data consistency. It can be observed 8 different types of events that affect
different microservices and domain entities with different
degrees of frequency and impact on the information. Most
events are published upon the removal of domain entities that
are referenced from microservices that use the modules that
contain the domain entities. Additionally, the events can trigger
a chain of events which further increases the inconsistency of
the application.
Concerning the impact of the events, the domain entities
Fragment and ScholarInter from the Text service and
User from the User service have the highest impact on the
consistency, affecting three different databases and multiple
domain entities of the Virtual, Game and Recommendation
services. In addition, they are also responsible for a chain
of events in the Virtual service, by triggering three different types of events, VirtualEditionInter-Remove,
VirtualEdition-Remove, and Tag-Remove, which
further increase the inconsistency in the services. Note that,
the impact of multiple databases in this case study is related
with the associations removed between the subdomains, which
creates indirect relations between the databases that need to
be kept consistent through the use of events, because the used
services cannot use the services that use them.
The events have a higher impact if they trigger a large
number of changes, like the domain entity remove events of
the Text and User services which, fortunately, are the ones
that have a lower frequency. On one hand, the archive has a
predefined set of fragments that do not change, which means
that they are almost like immutable entities, they are loaded
once. On the other hand, it is very uncommon to delete the
archive users. Therefore, the Text and User service information

Event Type Publisher Subscriber Impacted Domain Entities Frequency Event Trigger Impact
Fragment-Remove Text Virtual VirtualEditionInter Low VEInter-Remove
Tag-Remove High
ScholarInter-Remove Text Virtual VirtualEditionInter Low VEInter-Remove
Tag-Remove High
SimpleText-Remove Text Virtual Annotation Low Tag-Remove High
User-Remove User
Virtual
Member,
SelectedBy
Tag
Annotation
Low Tag-Remove High
Game ClassificationGame Low - High
Recommendation RecommendationWeights Low - High
VirtualEdition-Remove Virtual Game ClassificationGame Medium - Low
VirtualEditionInter-Remove Virtual Game ClassificationGame Medium - Low
Tag-Remove Virtual Game ClassificationGame Medium - Low
Virtual-Export Virtual Game - Medium - Low
TABLE V: Different event types with the corresponding publisher/subscriber services, impacted information, frequency of
occurrence and the impact on the overall information
remains mostly unchanged throughout the execution of the
application under a normal operation, and are only removed
under exceptional situations with administrator privileges. This
makes the occurrence of these events very rare, which reduces
the complexity of managing the consistency.
Therefore, under normal operation, most of the inconsistencies result from the Virtual service subdomain and their
associations to the ClassficationGame. The Virtual service has a significant number of events that are frequently
published because a end-user can interact with its virtual
edition, removing some of their entities. On a positive note, the
impact of the inconsistent information is mainly focused on
the Game service and has a low effect on the overall behavior
of the application.
In general, the decentralized data approach and eventual
consistency achieved through the event-driven asynchronous
communication proved to be an efficient alternative to a
distributed transactional behaviour between the services in the
microservice architecture, where most of the functionalities
presented the same behaviour and were not affected by inconsistencies between the databases. This is mainly due to the
simple transactional behaviour of the functionalities that do
not span across different services, which, in most situations,
allows the use of the local transactions and for maintaining
the information consistent, thus having an overall low impact.
Finally, to improve the LdoD Archive performance, different
caches were implemented in the modular and microservice
architecture. However, throughout their use in the application,
these caches might become inconsistent as the information
changes and thus affects the consistency of the application.
Therefore, it is also necessary to do a similar evaluation of
the caches data consistency and their impact on the application behavior. The analysis resulted in similar conclusions,
most of the data in the caches was mostly immutable. Note,
however, that the result of this type of analysis depends of the
application semantics.
IV. DISCUSSION
The process of modularizing a monolith and migrating it to a
microservice architecture requires extensive refactoring of the
application and has a significant impact on the performance.
The modular monolith and microservice architecture share the
modularization requirements to address the decomposition of
the domain into the modules/services, while also addressing
the granularity of the interactions between the domain entities
for performance reasons. Therefore, the modular monolith
offers a beneficial groundwork for achieving a microservice
architecture. It manages the migration by the stepwise definition of the modularization through well-encapsulated modules,
which serve as the foundation of services, and break the
migration effort.
Through the evaluation, we addressed some concerns that
are often neglected in the literature, which focuses more
on technical aspects like communication technology, running
environments, and performance benchmarks. In what concerns
the migration effort, a significant effort was required for the
decomposition of the domain model, but it can be done in the
modular monolith migration, and so, free of the complexities
of distributed programming. In what concerns the migration
from the modular monolith to the microservices architecture,
the inter-service communication required changes in the interfaces of each service and the cost is directly related to the size
and quality of the REST API. Even though this refactoring
is composed of small changes, a poor quality interface can
increase the refactoring cost and propagate the changes to the
service features. If these constraints are considered when designing the modular interfaces, it will help in the introduction
of remote invocations.
Therefore, in the context of a stepwise migration of a
monolith into a microservice architecture, the intermediate
step of a modular monolith is advantageous, because it fosters
separation of concerns, highlighting complexities that might
have to be addressed before implementing a microservice
architecture, and helps on the decision on how to migrate.
Note that, with the modular monolith, the developers can

predict the coupling of the services, the expected performance
degradation of the communication and decide the type of communication between the services to detect functionalities that
can be affected by the lack of ACID transactional behaviour.
Additionally, it is possible to foresee the need to redefine a
functionality, for instance, due to performance, and proceed to
its refactoring in the context of the modular monolith, which
is a less complex environment than the microservices system.
On the other hand, we could also observe a consequence
of migrating a modular monolith with a significant number of
uses relationships like the LdoD Archive in terms of coupling
between the services. As previously stated, the behaviour
of the uses interaction corresponds to a synchronous request/response style of communication between the services in
order to maintain the dependencies. However, the synchronous
communication results in the coupling of the services being
too tight due to the fine-grained behaviour, which becomes
problematic, due to the weight of remote invocations, and
results in serious performance degradation. This analysis may
trigger the need to redefine the functionalities to have an
asynchronous behavior.
In what concerns performance, the impact on the performance was thoroughly evaluated. Focusing on the modular
monolith, the impact on the performance was related to the
amount of information sent between the modules through the
DTOs, while the number of inter-module invocations did not
have a relevant effect. Note that, the modular monolith, when
the amount of information transferred between modules is
low, can match and even obtain better performance in some
cases due to faster accesses to the database through the unique
identifiers that were introduced with the modularization. However, contrary to the modular monolith, the performance of the
microservice architecture was affected by the number of interservice invocations. These two factors combined should be
avoided when designing the microservice architecture, where
there is a performance degradation as the amount of transferred
information and the number of invocations increases.
The impact of performance degradation has to be considered when deciding whether to migrate to a microservices architecture. The latency it adds to functionalities, that
are implemented through synchronous invocations of remote
transactions, can impair the application usability. Therefore,
if the decision is to migrate, it may be necessary to redefine
the functionalities that have worse performance, changing the
perception the end user has of the application. For instance, the
Fragment Listing functionality could be redefined to present
the results using pagination. This need to change the functionality behavior is often ignored by the literature.
In terms of data consistency, it was necessary to analyse the
impact of eventual consistency associated with asynchronous
communication. An analysis of the published events, their
functionality behavior impact and frequency, is important to
identify possible consistency issues. Although it was not the
case, these consistency problems may also require a redefinition of the functionalities behavior. Note that, the LdoD
Archive do not have a significant number of functionalities that
do multiple writes, which would require an implementation
using sagas [2], [17]. Sagas require some sort of compensation
in case of failures, which would significantly increase the
migration effort and introduce new challenges. The modular
monolith may also help on the analysis of which cases to
consider.
The following threats to the validity of this study were
identified: (1) it is a single example of a migration; (2) it
depends on the technology and programming techniques used
in the monolith.
Despite being a single case study, it has some level of
complexity, the monolith has 71 domain entities and 81
bidirectional relations, and the literature lacks descriptions of
the problems and solutions associated with the migration from
monolith to microservices architecture. This study addressed
both the migration into a modular monolith and microservice
architecture, and provided feedback on challenges faced in the
migration that benefits the overall process.
The technology and programming techniques used in the
implementation of the monolith follow an object-oriented
approach, where the behavior is implemented through finegrained interactions between objects. A more transaction
script [13] based implementation of the functionalities may
result in different types of problems. The conclusions of this
study apply when the monolith is developed using a rich
object-oriented domain model. On the other hand, the monolith
is implemented using Spring-Boot technology which follows
the standards of web application design.
Additionally, the case study presented specific types of
functionalities that either requested significant amounts of
information or were implemented through fine-grained invocations with a strong synchronous behaviour. Different type
of functionalities can present other performance results, but in
general most functionalities in the LdoD Archive were similar
to the selected functionalities. Therefore, a good coverage of
the functionalities is provided.
V. RELATED WORK
There are several challenges when migrating from monolith
systems to a microservices architecture [18], [19], such as the
development effort to migrate the monolith and the performance impacts, and we can find in the literature the description
of the migration of some large monoliths [20]–[22].
The migration described by Gouigoux and Tamzalit [20]
discusses the aspects of service migration, deployability and
orchestration. It reports an improvement in the performance,
but does not describe details of the refactorings and optimizations done. Bucchiarone et al [21] describe the lessons learned
from their migration of a monolith in the banking domain,
focusing on the benefits and challenges of the new system,
but do not discuss the migration effort and the impact on
performance. Barbosa and Maia [22] discuss the migration
of a large monolith to a microservices architecture, where the
monolith business logic is implemented using stored procedures, and they focus on the process of identifying microservices. Megargel et al [23] provide a practice-based view and

a methodology to transition from a monolith application into
a cloud-based microservice architecture. Despite addressing
the different technology aspects and describing the migration
process, the migration effort was not addressed, although they
did observe benefits from the migration, including on the
performance. On the other hand, an opposite point of view
was presented by Mendonc¸a [24] who discussed the decision
to revert the microservice architecture back into a monolith,
focusing on the burdens from the microservice architecture and
the lessons learned. The researchers also addressed the cost of
different aspects of the microservice architecture such as the
scalability, security isolation and deployment, but, even in this
case, migration effort and performance are not addressed.
Therefore, it is necessary to have more case studies that
describe the migration efforts and the architectural trade-offs,
besides the advantages, and drawbacks, of the final product.
Due to the technological complexity, it is beneficial that these
studies follow a separation of concerns approach, such that the
analysis can be done according to levels of complexity. In this
paper we contribute by describing the refactoring, and related
effort, associated with the migration of a large monolith to
a microservices architecture, using a modular monolith as an
intermediate step.
On the other hand, there is work on impact that the
migration of a monolith to a microservices architecture has
on performance, although it follows different perspectives.
Ueda et al. [8] compare the performance of microservices
with monolith architecture to conclude that the performance
gap increases with the granularity of the microservices, where
the monolith performs better. Villamizar et al. [7] show different results, concluding that in some situations the performance
is better in the microservices context and that it reduces the
infrastructure costs, but request time increases in microservices
due to the gateway overhead. Al-Debagy and Martinek [10]
conclude that they have similar performance values for average
load, and the monolith performs better for a small load. In a
second scenario the monolith has better throughput, but similar
latency, when the system was stressed in terms of simultaneous
requests. Bjørndal et al. [25] benchmark a library system,
that has four use cases and considers synchronous and asynchronous relations between microservices. They observe that
the monolith performs better except for scalability. Therefore,
they identify the need to carefully design the microservices,
in order to reduce the communication between them to a
minimum, and conclude that it would be interesting to apply
these measures in systems that are closer to the kind of
systems used by companies. Guam´an et al. [26] designed
and implemented a multi-stage architectural migration into a
microservice architecture and compared the performance of
the monolith and the intermediary stages to the microservice
architecture. They conclude that the microservice architecture
has worse latency. Flygare et al. [27] found that in their
case study the monolith performed better in terms of latency
and throughput while consuming less resources than the microservice architecture. In addition, they also observed some
throughput benefits in running the microservice in a cluster
instead of running in a single computer.
Some other perspectives compare the performance of monolith and microservices systems in terms of the distributed
architecture of the solution, such as master-slave [28], the
characteristics of the running environment, whether it uses
containers or virtual machines [9], the particular technology
used, such as different service discovery technologies [10], or
other microservices deployment aspects [11]. A major aspect
of the performance is the type of inter-service communication
and the technology used. Hong et al. [29] compare the performance of synchronous and asynchronous communication
and concluded that the asynchronous approach offered a more
stable performance overall, but with a lower response request performance. Fernandes et al. [30] presented similar results with the asynchronous communication outperforming the
REST communication in performance and data loss prevention
on a large data context. Shafabakhsh et al. [31] leverage on
Fernandes et al. [30] research and conclude that there is a
benefit of synchronous communication under small loads.
These results show that an asynchronous communication
tends to be more suitable to a microservice architecture.
However, a behaviour suited synchronous communication like
the REST API is more accessible to the migration from a
modular monolith and reduces the complexity of redesigning the functionalities into an asynchronous behaviour. Our
approach allows to separate concerns when measuring the
performance impact of the migration, and led us to conclude
that it is already significant when migrating to a modular
monolith, in the absence of distributed communication and
microservices implementation technologies. And, contrarily to
some of the related work, in which there is no redefinition
of the functionalities of the monolith, we highlight that such
redefinition may be required due, for instance, to performance
degradation.
VI. CONCLUSION
With this work, we described the migration from a large
object-oriented monolith into a microservice architecture using
a modular monolith as a middle stage, while analysing the
migration effort to achieve both, the modular and microservice
architectures, as well as the overall impact on the performance.
The results show that the modular monolith can be used as
an intermediate artifact that facilitates the migration into the
microservice architecture, while providing a more agile software development environment before tackling the challenges
of a microservice architecture. In addition, the modular monolith also helped in addressing concerns regarding the interservice communication, eventual consistency and performance
optimizations before the second migration step.
The migration into a microservice architecture revealed a
significant impact on the application for both refactoring and
performance. Most of the migration cost was connected to
the modules and the interfaces to implement services with the
desired inter-service communication, in which the quality of
the modules and interfaces has a significant impact on the cost.
On the other hand, a serious consequence of the migration was

the large impact on performance associated with the interservice communication, which required functionalities to be
reimplemented to have coarse-grained interactions.
Overall, the migration to a microservices architecture presented several challenges with different levels of impact on
the migration effort, performance, and data consistency, which
highly depended on the application structure and semantics. In
the LdoD Archive, the migration presented a serious impact on
the performance due to the network overheads that proved to
be far too high compared to the previous architectures, but
on the other hand, it offered a more scalable and manageable
architecture.
Although we describe a single case study of migration, it
is of a system that is in production, and implemented using
the best practices for the development of web applications.
Additionally, our stepwise approach seems suitable for further
studies, because it fosters a separation of concerns that helps
on the controlled introduction of complexity, and on the
analysis of the results.
The code repository is publicly available in a GitHub
repository4, in which the branch master contains the monolith
and branches modular-monolith and microservices contain the
result of the respective migrations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by national funds through FCT,
Fundac¸ ˜ao para a Ciˆencia e a Tecnologia, under project
UIDB/50021/2020.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Evans, Domain-Driven Design: Tacking Complexity In the Heart of
Software. Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2003.
[2] C. Richardson, Microservices Patterns. Manning, 2019.
[3] W. F. Opdyke and R. E. Johnson, “Creating abstract superclasses
by refactoring,” in Proceedings of the 1993 ACM Conference on
Computer Science, ser. CSC ’93. New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, 1993, p. 66–73. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/170791.170804
[4] M. Fowler, Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code (2nd
Edition). Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2018.
[5] D. Haywood, “In defense of the monolith,” in Microservices vs.
Monoliths - The Reality Beyond the Hype. InfoQ, 2017, vol. 52,
pp. 18–37. [Online]. Available: https://www.infoQ.com/minibooks/
emag-microservices-monoliths
[6] M. Fowler and J. Lewis. (2014) Microservices. [Online]. Available:
http://martinfowler.com/articles/microservices.html
[7] M. Villamizar, O. Garc´es, H. Castro, M. Verano, L. Salamanca, R. Casallas, and S. Gil, “Evaluating the monolithic and the microservice architecture pattern to deploy web applications in the cloud,” in 2015 10th
Computing Colombian Conference (10CCC), 2015, pp. 583–590.
[8] T. Ueda, T. Nakaike, and M. Ohara, “Workload characterization for
microservices,” in 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Workload
Characterization (IISWC), 2016, pp. 1–10.
[9] A. M. Joy, “Performance comparison between linux containers and
virtual machines,” in 2015 International Conference on Advances in
Computer Engineering and Applications, 2015, pp. 342–346.
[10] O. Al-Debagy and P. Martinek, “A comparative review of microservices
and monolithic architectures,” in 2018 IEEE 18th International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Informatics (CINTI), 2018, pp.
149–154.
[11] F. Tapia, M. Mora, W. Fuertes, H. Aules, E. Flores, and T. Toulkeridis,
“From monolithic systems to microservices: A comparative study of
performance,” Applied Sciences, vol. 10, no. 17, 2020.
4https://github.com/socialsoftware/edition
[12] D. Garlan, F. Bachmann, J. Ivers, J. Stafford, L. Bass, P. Clements,
and P. Merson, Documenting Software Architectures: Views and Beyond,
2nd ed. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2010.
[13] M. Fowler, Patterns of Enterprise Application Architecture. Addison-
Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2002.
[14] S. M. Olbrich, D. S. Cruzes, and D. I. K. Sjøberg, “Are all code smells
harmful? a study of god classes and brain classes in the evolution of
three open source systems,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on
Software Maintenance, Sep. 2010, pp. 1–10.
[15] G. Salton and C. Buckley, “Term-weighting approaches in automatic
text retrieval,” Information Processing & Management, vol. 24, no. 5,
pp. 513 – 523, 1988. [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/0306457388900210
[16] K. J. Lienberherr, “Formulations and benefits of the law of demeter,”
SIGPLAN Not., vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 67–78, Mar. 1989. [Online].
Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/66083.66089
[17] H. Garcia-Molina and K. Salem, “Sagas,” SIGMOD Rec., vol. 16,
no. 3, p. 249–259, Dec. 1987. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.
1145/38714.38742
[18] P. Di Francesco, P. Lago, and I. Malavolta, “Migrating towards microservice architectures: An industrial survey,” in 2018 IEEE International
Conference on Software Architecture (ICSA), 2018, pp. 29–2909.
[19] M. Kalske, N. M¨akitalo, and T. Mikkonen, “Challenges when moving
from monolith to microservice architecture,” in Current Trends in Web
Engineering, I. Garrig´os and M. Wimmer, Eds. Cham: Springer
International Publishing, 2018, pp. 32–47.
[20] J. Gouigoux and D. Tamzalit, “From monolith to microservices: Lessons
learned on an industrial migration to a web oriented architecture,” in
2017 IEEE International Conference on Software Architecture Workshops (ICSAW), 2017, pp. 62–65.
[21] A. Bucchiarone, N. Dragoni, S. Dustdar, S. T. Larsen, and M. Mazzara,
“From monolithic to microservices: An experience report from the
banking domain,” IEEE Software, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 50–55, 2018.
[22] M. H. Gomes Barbosa and P. H. M. Maia, “Towards identifying
microservice candidates from business rules implemented in stored
procedures,” in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Software Architecture Companion (ICSA-C), 2020, pp. 41–48.
[23] A. Megargel, V. Shankararaman, and D. K. Walker, “Migrating from
monoliths to cloud-based microservices: A banking industry example,”
in Software Engineering in the Era of Cloud Computing. Springer,
2020, pp. 85–108.
[24] N. C. Mendonca, C. Box, C. Manolache, and L. Ryan, “The monolith
strikes back: Why istio migrated from microservices to a monolithic
architecture,” IEEE Software, vol. 38, no. 05, pp. 17–22, sep 2021.
[25] N. Bjørndal, A. Bucchiarone, M. Mazzara, N. Dragoni, S. Dustdar,
F. B. Kessler, and T. Wien, “Migration from monolith to microservices:
Benchmarking a case study,” 2020, unpublished. [Online]. Available:
http://10.13140/RG.2.2.27715.14883
[26] D. Guaman, L. Yaguachi, C. C. Samanta, J. H. Danilo, and F. Soto,
“Performance evaluation in the migration process from a monolithic
application to microservices,” in 2018 13th Iberian Conference on
Information Systems and Technologies (CISTI). IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–
8.
[27] R. Flygare and A. Holmqvist, “Performance characteristics between
monolithic and microservice-based systems,” Bachelor’s Thesis, Faculty
of Computing at Blekinge Institute of Technology, 2017.
[28] M. Amaral, J. Polo, D. Carrera, I. Mohomed, M. Unuvar, and M. Steinder, “Performance evaluation of microservices architectures using containers,” in 2015 IEEE 14th International Symposium on Network
Computing and Applications, 2015, pp. 27–34.
[29] X. J. Hong, H. S. Yang, and Y. H. Kim, “Performance analysis of
restful api and rabbitmq for microservice web application,” in 2018 International Conference on Information and Communication Technology
Convergence (ICTC). IEEE, 2018, pp. 257–259.
[30] J. L. Fernandes, I. C. Lopes, J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, and S. Ullah,
“Performance evaluation of restful web services and amqp protocol,” in
2013 Fifth International Conference on Ubiquitous and Future Networks
(ICUFN), 2013, pp. 810–815.
[31] B. Shafabakhsh, R. Lagerstr¨om, and S. Hacks, “Evaluating the impact
of inter process communication in microservice architectures.” in QuA-
SoQ@ APSEC, 2020, pp. 55–63.