Jovis: A Visualization Tool for PostgreSQL Query Optimizer
Yoojin Choi
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
cyj@dbs.snu.ac.kr
Juhee Han
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
juheehan@dbs.snu.ac.kr
Kyoseung Koo
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
koo@dbs.snu.ac.kr
Bongki Moon
Seoul National University
Seoul, Korea
bkmoon@snu.ac.kr
Abstract
Query optimizers are essential components of relational database
management systems that directly impact query performance as
they transform input queries into efficient execution plans. While
users can obtain the final execution plan using the EXPLAIN command and leverage existing visualization tools for intuitive understanding, the internal decision-making processes of query optimizers are hidden from users, making it difficult to understand how
the plan is constructed. To address this challenge, we present Jovis, an interactive visualization tool designed to explore the query
optimization process in PostgreSQL. Jovis provides a comprehensive view of the entire optimization workflow through tailored
visualization for each optimization strategy. It also includes features that allow users to participate in optimization by providing hints, tuning parameters, and reusing prior optimization results. Jovis serves as both an educational tool for learners and a
practical resource for database professionals, helping users understand and improve query optimization by guiding the optimizer to
make better decisions or consider previously unexplored plans. The
source code, data, and/or other artifacts have been made available
at https://github.com/orgs/snu-jovis.
CCS Concepts
• Information systems → Data management systems; • Humancentered computing → Visualization systems and tools.
Keywords
Query Optimization, Interactive Visualization, PostgreSQL, Database Management Systems
1 Introduction
Query optimizers are a core component of relational database management systems (RDBMS) as they play a key role in determining
query performance. They transform declarative SQL queries into
efficient execution plans by exploring a vast search space and selecting the most optimal plan. At the same time, query optimization
is one of the most challenging aspects of DBMS design, primarily
due to the NP-hard nature of finding an optimal join order [9] and
the complexity of picking the best physical operators for each logical operation. These challenges have driven decades of research,
from the traditional cost-based optimizers such as System R [19] to
recent machine learning-based approaches [11, 22].
Understanding the decision-making process of the query optimizer greatly benefits both learners and practitioners. For learners,
it provides a grasp of query optimization beyond the high-level descriptions of execution plans, such as how join orders and physical
operators are determined. For practitioners, deeper insight into how
plans are generated, including which alternatives were considered,
how the costs were estimated and compared, and the rationale behind the final plan, helps explain suboptimal decisions and enables
manual tuning using techniques like hints or configuration adjustments. Furthermore, such transparency is essential for extending
or improving the optimizer as it clarifies its underlying strategies
and implementation.
Despite its importance, the query optimization process remains
largely opaque to users unless they delve into the source code. While
DBMSs like PostgreSQL [7] and MySQL [14] provide EXPLAIN and
ANALYZE commands to display the final execution plan and its estimated cost, along with external tools PEV2 [4] and MySQL Workbench [15] that offer graphical representations of the plan, these
outputs only reflect the outcome of the optimization process rather
than the reasoning behind it. Several research efforts have aimed to
make query optimization more accessible through visualization and
interactive features. QO-Insight [1] focuses on visualizing query
execution traces of steered query optimizers, which use hints to
correct planning mistakes and MOCHA [20] enables users to analyze the impact of alternative physical operator choices. While
these works visualize and help compare the query execution plans,
they fall short of providing a comprehensive view of the internal
decision-making process of query optimizers.
In this demonstration, we present Jovis, an interactive visualization tool designed to reveal the query optimization process of
PostgreSQL. Unlike existing tools that focus solely on the final
execution plan, Jovis provides visibility into how the optimizer
constructs the plan. It visualizes the explored search space, the evaluated join orders and physical operators, and the cost estimations
that drive plan selection. Beyond visualization, Jovis introduces
user-guided optimization, allowing users to steer the optimizer toward better decisions or explore untapped search spaces. By making
the optimizer transparent and interactive, Jovis not only bridges
the gap between high-level execution plans and the underlying
optimization logic but also helps users diagnose suboptimal choices
and improve query performance.
Key features of Jovis include:
arXiv:2411.14788v2 [cs.DB] 25 Mar 2025

Yoojin Choi, Juhee Han, Kyoseung Koo, and Bongki Moon
• Comprehensive visualizations of PostgreSQL’s optimization process, covering both its cost-based optimizer using
dynamic programming and genetic algorithm.
• An in-depth view of the cost model, including cost estimation formulas that illustrate how costs impact plan selection.
• User-guided optimization, an interactive feature that allows
users to guide the optimizer through hints, configuration
adjustments, and leveraging prior optimization results.
We chose PostgreSQL as our starting point due to its wide adoption and two complementary optimization approaches. Our tool
is designed to be extensible, with future work planned to support
additional DBMSs.
2 Related Work
Visualization of Query Optimization. Several systems address
specific challenges in visualizing query optimization in the database community. Picasso [8] provides graphical profiling and analysis of query optimizer behavior. QE3D [18] introduces a threedimensional representation of distributed query plans, helping users
identify key performance aspects. DBinsight [17] visualizes the
query processing pipeline and unifies heterogeneous data structures across RDBMSs through a common interface. MOCHA [20]
explores the impact of physical operator selection by allowing users
to compare alternative plans and observe corresponding performance changes. QO-Insight [1] targets steered query optimizers
that use hints to address planning mistakes, offering a visual inspection of query execution traces.
A variety of visualization tools for query optimizers have been
developed. Postgres Explain Visualizer (PEV) [21] and its successor
PEV2 [4] render EXPLAIN output into interactive trees, enabling
users to analyze the structure and estimated costs of execution
plans. Similarly, MySQL Workbench [15] provides graphical plan
visualization for MySQL as part of a broader suite of database
modeling and administration tools.
Efforts have also been made to visualize genetic algorithm [3],
which inspired Jovis’s approach to GEQO visualization. However,
our system is tailored specifically to GEQO, leveraging unique data
extracted from optimizer logs and offering interactive features for
genetic query optimization. To the best of our knowledge, Jovis is
the first tool to provide dedicated visualization for GEQO.
PostgreSQL Query Optimizer. In PostgreSQL, the optimizer
examines possible query plans by generating data structures called
paths, which represent partial or complete plans along with their estimated costs. The standard optimizer builds these paths by enumerating possible plans using dynamic programming [12] and evaluates
them with a cost model to determine the cheapest path. However,
this approach becomes infeasible for queries involving a large number of joins, as exploring the exponentially growing search space
requires excessive time and memory. In such cases, PostgreSQL
switches to the Genetic Query Optimizer (GEQO), which applies a
genetic algorithm to iteratively generate and refine join sequences
over successive generations using recombination mechanisms, balancing optimization quality with computational efficiency [6].
Figure 1: Architecture of Jovis
3 Jovis
This section provides an overview of the architecture of Jovis, illustrated in Figure 1. Jovis consists of three main components: a
patched version of PostgreSQL, an interactive user interface, and a
backend. Users submit queries through the frontend’s SQL editor,
which are transmitted to PostgreSQL via the backend. PostgreSQL
processes the queries and generates detailed optimizer logs, which
are collected and parsed by the backend into structured JavaScript
Object Notation (JSON). The processed data is then sent to the
frontend, where it is visualized through an interactive interface.
We applied a lightweight patch to PostgreSQL 16.2 to add detailed
logging of the optimizer’s internal decisions, including paths and
costs. Since the patch is non-intrusive, the system can be easily
extended to other PostgreSQL versions.
3.1 Graphical User Interface
Figure 2 represents the graphical user interface (GUI) designed to
offer an intuitive and interactive experience for users to explore
and understand the query optimization process. Built with React
and D3.js [2], the interface leverages data-driven visualizations to
present complex optimization details in an accessible manner.
Sidebar A provides a flexible interface for managing query
planning visualizations. It consists of three components: (i) Queries
allows users to select, deselect, or delete submitted queries, supporting side-by-side comparison of multiple queries and their optimizations. This helps users analyze how different queries or configurations affect the optimizer’s decisions, (ii) History maintains a
record of previously executed queries, enabling quick reuse and reducing repetitive input and (iii) Presets includes predefined queries
from widely used benchmarks, TPC-H [16], TPC-DS [13], and Join
Order Benchmark (JOB) [10]. It simplifies experimentation and
performance evaluation. SQL editor B allows users to submit
queries, select a database, and execute them for analysis.
For both the query planning views C and D , users can switch
to the EXPLAIN tab to visualize the EXPLAIN output as a hierarchical tree as presented in Figure 3. This view provides an intuitive
understanding of the final execution plan.

Jovis: A Visualization Tool for PostgreSQL Query Optimizer
Figure 2: Graphical User Interface of Jovis
Figure 3: Visualization of EXPLAIN for TPC-H Query 11
Figure 4: Subquery Support in TPC-H Query 11
3.1.1 Standard Optimizer. Query Planning View C visualizes
PostgreSQL’s standard optimization process using dynamic programming. The optimizer adopts a bottom-up approach, starting
by determining access paths for each base relation. It then incrementally constructs join sequences and selects physical operators
until the complete execution plan is achieved.
To effectively depict the process, Jovis employs a directed acyclic
graph (DAG), which is well-suited for representing the bottom-up
strategy due to its ability to handle multiple parent nodes and hierarchical relationships. In this structure, circular nodes represent
relations or join sequences, while rectangular nodes represent physical operators considered during plan enumeration. Edges indicate
the application of an operator to its input relations or join orders.
The DAG is presented in an inverted layout where operators appear
as children of their associated relations. For example, the left DAG
in C1 shows multiple scan methods evaluated for each relation,
and nested loop join and hash join were explored for joining two
relations. Furthermore, as shown in Figure 4 for TPC-H Query 11,
Jovis supports subqueries by generating separate DAGs for each
one, making it possible to inspect complex queries in a modular
way.
Users can interact with the DAG through several features. The
Play/Stop button in C1 animates the optimization process, reducing the opacity of non-selected nodes to make the decision path
easy to track. The Cost Scale toggle adjusts the size of operator nodes based on their estimated cost, highlighting why specific
operators or join sequences were chosen. The right DAG shows
the result after activating both features. Additionally, clicking on
an operator node reveals detailed cost factors and calculation
formulas in C2 .
Example 1. C2 illustrates an example of cost analysis comparing
a sequential scan and a bitmap heap scan for the lineitem relation
in TPC-H Query 14. The query needs to access 74,900 tuples out of
a total of 6,001,215 (𝑁𝑟𝑜𝑤𝑠 ). Although the bitmap heap scan incurs a

Yoojin Choi, Juhee Han, Kyoseung Koo, and Bongki Moon
(a) Range Sliders (b) Stacked Bar Chart
Figure 5: Interactive Features for GEQO
startup cost for building the list of disk pages to fetch, it significantly
reduces the number of pages (𝑁𝑝𝑎𝑔𝑒𝑠 ) and tuples (𝑁𝑡𝑢𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑠 ) accessed.
This reduction in disk I/O and CPU costs for scanning only the
relevant records makes the bitmap heap scan more efficient than
a sequential scan, which fetches all pages and processes every
record. Due to the query’s low selectivity, the bitmap heap scan
achieves a much lower cost, leading the optimizer to select it. As
demonstrated in this example, users can understand the rationale
behind the optimizer’s decision by examining the cost.
By combining these features, Jovis helps users visually grasp all
paths considered during optimization and the rationale behind the
optimizer’s decisions, including detailed cost calculations.
3.1.2 Genetic Query Optimizer. Query Planning View D visualizes PostgreSQL’s GEQO, which applies a genetic algorithm
to heuristically explore join orders when exhaustive enumeration
becomes impractical (i.e., when the number of relations involved
in joins reaches or exceeds the PostgreSQL’s configurable parameter geqo_threshold). GEQO iteratively refines a population of
candidate join sequences, referred to as genes, through selection,
crossover, and replacement. Each generation maintains a pool of
genes, where lower-cost genes are considered more fit. New genes
are generated via crossover, combining segments of two parent
genes to produce offspring. The pool is then sorted by estimated
cost and the least fit genes are discarded. This process continues
until a preset number of join sequences are evaluated.
Jovis employs a grid heatmap, inspired by Cruz [3], to visualize
the GEQO process. The heatmap D1 represents the pool of genes
across generations, with color gradients to indicate their estimated
costs. This effectively demonstrates how GEQO improves fitness
over time. In addition, a line chart D2 tracks the best, worst,
median, and average costs throughout the optimization process,
providing an overview of cost trends.
Users can interact with the visualization to explore the optimization process in detail. The range sliders in D1 allow users to
focus on specific generations or genes. As shown in Figure 5a, when
zoomed in on a smaller range, crossover visualizations appear, illustrating which parent genes contribute to offspring through edges.
In the cost chart D2 , users can hover over lines to pinpoint the
specific generation, toggle between linear and logarithmic scales,
and click on legends to isolate metrics for focused analysis. Clicking on a gene in D1 displays its join sequence as a tree in D3 ,
with operator costs represented as a stacked bar chart. Users can
click on each stack to see how much the corresponding operator
accounts for the total cost. As presented in Figure 5b, selecting
a stack highlights the related operator node in red and displays
its cost and percentage at the bottom. When the selected gene is
newly generated in the current generation, the crossover visualization in D4 is activated. An arc diagram shows how parent
genes’ join sequences contribute to the offspring’s join sequence
using color-coded edges. Moreover, users can rerun the same query
with prior optimization results and customized configuration in
D5 (See Section 3.3.2 for details).
These dedicated visualizations and interactive features make the
complex and opaque GEQO process accessible and understandable.
Users can observe the optimizer’s evolutionary behavior, understand why certain join sequences are favored, analyze cost distributions, and explore how crossover operations are executed.
3.2 Backend
The Jovis backend connects the frontend GUI with PostgreSQL
through an Application Protocol Interface service. As shown in
Figure 1, the query submitter transmits user queries to PostgreSQL,
where they undergo parsing, rewriting, and optimization to determine the optimal execution plan. The executor then runs the
execution plan, and relevant log data are returned to the backend.
The backend parser processes this data and formats it into JSON,
including all necessary fields for visualization in the user interface.
To enhance transparency into the optimization process, Jovis
introduces a minimal patch to PostgreSQL that enriches its logs
with detailed optimizer state data. For the standard optimizer, the
patch captures information generated during query plan enumeration, including access paths, path costs, and join sequences. In
the case of GEQO, it records each step of join sequence generation
and crossover operations. These internal states are written to a
log file during query optimization. Upon receiving query results
from PostgreSQL, the backend processes the log file. Since the log
contains unstructured plain text, the parser is crucial for extracting
and converting the data into a structured, readable format. It first
identifies the optimizer type and then extracts the corresponding
data: path lists, costs, and the cheapest paths for the standard optimizer; generation information, join sequences, and associated costs
for GEQO. The parsed data are formatted into JSON, combined with
the query result, and passed to the frontend for visualization.
3.3 User-Guided Optimization
Jovis empowers users to actively participate in the query optimization process through user-guided optimization. By influencing the
optimizer’s decisions or reusing previous optimization results, users
can diagnose suboptimal plans, explore alternative plans, and improve query performance in a controlled and intuitive manner.
3.3.1 Hint. Jovis supports the use of hints to guide the optimizer
by specifying preferred physical operators or join orders. This capability is useful in scenarios where the optimizer selects suboptimal
plans or when manual tuning is required. By providing hints, users

Jovis: A Visualization Tool for PostgreSQL Query Optimizer
/* +
SeqScan ( sales_returns )
NestLoop ( sales_returns catalog_page date_dim )
*/
(a) Hint
(b) Guided GEQO
Figure 6: User-Guided Optimization
can override the optimizer’s decisions and visually analyze the impact of hints on the optimization process. Since PostgreSQL does
not natively support hints, Jovis integrates the pg_hint_plan extension [5] by applying a minor patch to add logging capabilities to
the extension. Hints are specified using a special comment syntax,
prefixed with /*+ and ending with */, as shown in Figure 6a.
Example 2. C in Figure 2 demonstrates user-guided optimization
using hints. In this example, users apply a hint to TPC-H Query 14
to enforce a nested loop join (right DAG), overriding the optimizer’s
choice of a hash join (left DAG). This change in the join method also
impacts the access paths for base relations. In the hash join plan,
the optimizer sequentially scans the part relation to build a hash
table and then probes it with the lineitem relation. In contrast,
the nested loop join plan iterates over each record in the lineitem
relation and looks up matching rows in the part relation. The
join condition is l_partkey = p_partkey, where p_partkey is
the primary key of the part. PostgreSQL automatically creates an
index on primary key columns, allowing the optimizer to perform
an index scan on p_partkey. As a result, for each row in lineitem,
matching records can be efficiently retrieved from part using the
index. As such, users can experiment with different execution plans
and observe their impact on the optimization process.
3.3.2 Guided GEQO. Jovis enhances GEQO by providing custom
initialization of its pool. This feature is especially useful for analytical workloads, where the same queries are often executed
repeatedly. By leveraging prior optimization results and tuning
configurations, users can improve the optimality of the execution
plan and explore the larger search space.
From the first two input fields in Figure 6b, users can customize
the initialization of the pool. They can specify the number of highperforming genes to include (e.g., the top 5 join sequences with
the minimum cost from a prior run) or provide user-defined join
sequences. Above the second input field, each relation’s unique
ID and name are given. Users can define join orders by entering
(a) Default Join Order (b) User-Guided Join Order
Figure 7: Guided GEQO in JOB Query 10c
space-delimited gene IDs and specify multiple join orders by concatenating them with commas. This guided initialization ensures
that the genetic algorithm begins with a combination of proven
solutions and user-defined candidates, increasing the likelihood of
discovering better execution plans while avoiding the inefficiencies
of random initialization.
Jovis also provides a user-friendly interface for controlling key
GEQO parameters, eliminating the need to manually add SQL commands or edit the PostgreSQL configuration file. From the last two
input fields in Figure 6b, users can adjust the geqo_seed, which controls the random initialization of the pool to ensure reproducibility,
and the selection_bias, which determines the selective pressure
applied during parent selection in crossover. By tuning these parameters, users can balance exploration (i.e., maintaining diversity
among genes) and exploitation (i.e., intensifying the search around
high-fitness genes).
Example 3. To show the effectiveness of user-guided optimization
in GEQO, we use JOB Query 10c as an example. Figure 7a shows the
query plan chosen by GEQO and its associated cost in the default
configuration, with geqo_seed set to 0 and selection_bias set to
2. By rerunning the query using Jovis ’s user-guided optimization
feature as shown in Figure 6b, users set a different geqo_seed value,
focus on diversity by lowering selection_bias to 1.5, and initialize
the population with the fiver lowest-cost genes from the previous
run. As a result, GEQO discovers a more efficient execution plan,
reducing the cost by 7%, as seen in Figure 7b. This shows Jovis’s
ability to improve query performance through guided exploration
of join sequences in GEQO.
4 Demonstration
In the demonstration, we will showcase the user experience with
Jovis through two representative scenarios. The demonstration
highlights the effectiveness of Jovis in both educational and practical contexts, helping users understand and participate in query
optimization. In each scenario, users begin by selecting a query
from the Presets or History panel in A or submitting a custom
query through B and then choose the target database. Once the

Yoojin Choi, Juhee Han, Kyoseung Koo, and Bongki Moon
query is processed, users can explore tailored optimization visualizations in the Query Planning tab and view the final execution
plan by switching to the EXPLAIN tab. In the EXPLAIN tab, users
can zoom in and out, reposition the tree, and collapse or expand
nodes by clicking on them. This interaction is to simplify complex
plans by focusing on specific parts of the execution plan for closer
inspection. Users can customize the query view layout and perform
side-by-side analysis of multiple query plans using the Queries
panel in A . By toggling the checkboxes, users can selectively show
or hide views for specific queries, and by clicking the trash icon,
they can permanently remove a query view.
4.1 Standard Optimizer
In scenarios where dynamic programming is applied for query optimization, Jovis constructs a DAG in C1 . The DAG presents the
scan methods for base relations, join orders, and join strategies
considered during query planning. Users can zoom in and out and
reposition the DAG to focus on specific portions of the planning.
By clicking the Play button, users can simulate the step-by-step
construction of the final execution plan and observe how the optimizer selects the cheapest paths based on estimated costs. Toggling
the Show Cost Scale adjusts the size of operator nodes according
to their estimated cost, helping users identify cost-intensive operations at a glance. For deeper analysis, users can click on a node
to examine detailed cost information in C2 , including the cost
factors, calculation formulas, and the values used in the calculation.
Selected nodes are highlighted with a red outline and can be selected or deselected individually. Users can select multiple nodes to
compare cost calculations across operators. For user-guided optimization using hints, users can add directives in the SQL editor B .
Hints are written at the top of the query, enclosed within /*+ and
*/, and consist of physical operators and relations in parentheses,
separated by whitespaces. After submitting the query with hints,
users can observe how the optimizer incorporates their guidance
into the plan.
4.2 Genetic Query Optimizer
In scenarios where GEQO is applied, Jovis provides an interactive
heatmap in D1 to visualize the evolution of join sequences, represented as genes, over generations. Users can observe how GEQO
explores the search space and progressively converges toward plans
with better fitness, reflected by lower estimated costs. The Cost
Chart D2 tracks overall cost trends across generations using various metrics. Users can hover over lines to view precise cost values at
specific generations and selectively display metrics by clicking the
legend. For deeper exploration, users can hover over a gene within
the heatmap to view a tooltip displaying its generation, fitness rank,
and estimated cost. Upon selection, Jovis presents a detailed view
in D3 that includes the join order and physical operators in a tree,
along with a stacked bar chart that breaks down the estimated costs
by the operator. Users can further focus on specific generations
or subsets of genes by adjusting range sliders in D1 . When the
selected range is sufficiently small, Jovis visualizes the parent-child
relationships produced by crossover using edges. By selecting an
offspring gene, crossover visualization D4 traces the origin of each
edge in its join sequence, revealing how sequences are inherited or
mutated. If the edge is inherited from both parents, it is displayed
as a split color, while mutated edges are shown in gray. For guided
GEQO, users can rerun the query by specifying the top 𝑁 genes
to initialize the pool, defining join orders if desired, and adjusting
geqo_seed and selection_bias parameters directly in D5 .
References
[1] Christoph Anneser, Mario Petruccelli, Nesime Tatbul, David Cohen, Zhenggang
Xu, Prithviraj Pandian, Nikolay Laptev, Ryan Marcus, and Alfons Kemper. 2023.
QO-Insight: Inspecting Steered Query Optimizers. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment 16, 12 (2023), 3922–3925.
[2] Michael Bostock, Vadim Ogievetsky, and Jeffrey Heer. 2011. D3 Data-Driven
Documents. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 17, 12
(2011), 2301–2309.
[3] António Malta Lopes da Cruz. 2014. Visualization for Genetic Algorithms. Master’s
thesis. University of Coimbra.
[4] Dalibo. 2024. PEV2: Postgres Explain Visualizer 2. https://github.com/dalibo/
pev2.
[5] NTT OSS Center DBMS Development and Support Team. 2024. pg_hint_plan:
Extension adding support for optimizer hints in PostgreSQL. https://github.com/
ossc-db/pg_hint_plan.
[6] The PostgreSQL Global Development Group. 2024. PostgreSQL: Documentation:
16: Chapter 62. Genetic Query Optimizer. https://www.postgresql.org/docs/16/
geqo.html
[7] The PostgreSQL Global Development Group. 2025. PostgreSQL. Retrieved March
10, 2025 from https://www.postgresql.org/
[8] Jayant R. Haritsa. 2010. The Picasso database query optimizer visualizer. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 3, 1–2 (2010), 1517–1520.
[9] Toshihide Ibaraki and Tiko Kameda. 1984. On the optimal nesting order for
computing N-relational joins. ACM Transactions on Database Systems (TODS) 9,
3 (1984), 482–502.
[10] Viktor Leis, Andrey Gubichev, Atanas Mirchev, Peter Boncz, Alfons Kemper, and
Thomas Neumann. 2015. How good are query optimizers, really? Proceedings of
the VLDB Endowment 9, 3 (2015), 204–215.
[11] Ryan Marcus, Parimarjan Negi, Hongzi Mao, Nesime Tatbul, Mohammad Alizadeh, and Tim Kraska. 2021. Bao: Making Learned Query Optimization Practical.
In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data. Virtual
Event, China, 1275–1288.
[12] Guido Moerkotte and Thomas Neumann. 2008. Dynamic programming strikes
back. In Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on Management of Data.
Vancouver, Canada, 539–552.
[13] Raghunath Othayoth Nambiar and Meikel Poess. 2006. The making of TPC-DS.
In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Very Large Data Bases.
Seoul, Korea, 1049–1058.
[14] Oracle. 2025. MySQL. Retrieved March 10, 2025 from https://www.mysql.com/
[15] Oracle. 2025. MySQL Workbench. https://www.mysql.com/products/workbench/
Version 8.0.41.
[16] Meikel Poess and Chris Floyd. 2000. New TPC benchmarks for decision support
and web commerce. ACM SIGMOD Record 29, 4 (2000), 64–71.
[17] Ying Rong, Hui Li, Kankan Zhao, Xiyue Gao, and Jiangtao Cui. 2022. DBinsight: A Tool for Interactively Understanding the Query Processing Pipeline in
RDBMSs. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Information
& Knowledge Management. Atlanta, GA, USA, 4960–4964.
[18] Daniel Scheibli, Christian Dinse, and Alexander Boehm. 2015. QE3D: Interactive
Visualization and Exploration of Complex, Distributed Query Plans. In Proceedings of the 2015 International Conference on Management of Data. Melbourne,
Victoria, Australia, 877–881.
[19] P. Griffiths Selinger, M. M. Astrahan, D. D. Chamberlin, R. A. Lorie, and T. G.
Price. 1979. Access path selection in a relational database management system. In
Proceedings of the 1979 International Conference on Management of Data. Boston,
Massachusetts, 23–34.
[20] Jess Tan, Desmond Yeo, Rachael Neoh, Huey-Eng Chua, and Sourav S Bhowmick.
2022. MOCHA: a tool for visualizing impact of operator choices in query execution plans for database education. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment 15, 12
(2022), 3602–3605.
[21] Alex Tatiyants. 2016. pev: Postgres Explain Visualizer. https://github.com/
AlexTatiyants/pev.
[22] Zongheng Yang, Wei-Lin Chiang, Sifei Luan, Gautam Mittal, Michael Luo, and
Ion Stoica. 2022. Balsa: Learning a Query Optimizer Without Expert Demonstrations. In Proceedings of the 2022 International Conference on Management of Data.
Philadelphia, PA, USA, 931–944.